---
logo: light
---

### The Data Transfer Initiative is an organization of industry partners, policy experts and technologists working to create tools and standards that improve data portability.

## Our beliefs about standards

**Build for users**
<br/>
Data portability tools should be easy to find, intuitive to use, and readily available for users.

**Privacy and Security**
<br/>
Providers on each side of the portability transaction should have strong privacy and security measures—such as encryption in transit—to guard against unauthorized access, diversion of data, or other types of fraud.

**Focus on users' data**
<br/>
Portability efforts should support and empower the individual user and how they shape their digital presence and activities. The content that a user creates, imports or approves for collection is to many the most obvious kind of data to transfer.  Data generated by user activity can be more challenging to make available in a sensible way that adds value for the user, but some applications may be very compelling.

**Respect Everyone**
<br/>
We live in a collaborative world: people connect and share on social media, they edit docs together, and they comment on videos, pictures and more. Data portability tools should be respectful of a user's expectations of the context of their contributions.   Careful understanding of use cases and respecting the contributions of all parties involved can inform choices about portability scope.

## The Team

Driven by a shared passion for technology and positive change, our staff brings diverse expertise to our mission.

## Keep up with DTI

## FAQs

### Still have a question?


<a class="button button-primary" href="/contact">
  Contact
</a>
