---
title:  Data Transfer Initiative Welcomes Expanded Team & Launches Newsletter
tags: admin
author: Chris Riley
---

It is hard for me to believe that it has only been a few short months since the launch of the Data Transfer Initiative. Since I started, I’ve traveled to DC and Brussels, spoken on panels and government workshops (check out my slides from the European Commission’s “The DMA and data related obligations” workshop [here](https://dtinit.us21.list-manage.com/track/click?u=3ba10a090b97c2dc608fd780e&id=c9878cc7a6&e=54811e5924)), published a [policy one-pager](https://dtinit.us21.list-manage.com/track/click?u=3ba10a090b97c2dc608fd780e&id=34b1d4dcca&e=54811e5924) and written [new articles](https://dtinit.us21.list-manage.com/track/click?u=3ba10a090b97c2dc608fd780e&id=8b1db241df&e=54811e5924) on [data portability](https://dtinit.us21.list-manage.com/track/click?u=3ba10a090b97c2dc608fd780e&id=16db51fc9b&e=54811e5924), and met with policymakers, civil society organizations, and industry stakeholders. And I've done it all as DTI’s sole full-time employee.

However, our mission to empower people by enabling effective data transfers is a significant one and it will require the efforts of many. That is why I’m proud to announce we are expanding the DTI team.

> **Delara Derakhshani** has joined DTI as Director of Policy. Ms. Derakhshani brings more than fifteen years of legal and policy expertise in privacy, technology, and telecommunications in the public and private sector serving in roles with Consumer Reports, Meta’s Reality Labs policy team, and the Entertainment Software Association.

> **Lisa Dusseault** will join DTI as our Chief Technology Officer in August. Ms. Dusseault previously served as the CTO and Co-Founder of Compaas. Prior to Compaas, Ms. Dusseault served in technical roles at StubHub, Smule, and Microsoft among others, and spent several years as the Applications Area Director at the Internet Engineering Task Force.

## What’s Next

Together with our partners and the open-source community contributing to the Data Transfer Project, we have a number of important data portability projects in the pipeline from additional photo-sharing transfers to explorations of brand new verticals. And, showing the value of data transfers beyond everyday products, we are proud to be partnering with AcademyHealth and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation to explore ways for individuals to share their data with medical researchers to improve clinical diagnoses.


In parallel, we will be writing more about public policy, simultaneously articulating the fundamentals of data portability in a clear and accessible way, while pushing at its cutting edges and hardest questions.


Finally, over the coming weeks and months, I will be publishing a newsletter to share updates about DTI and the important work we are doing to continue and expand the vision of bringing data portability to all. Next week, you will receive the first edition of this new newsletter. But because I value you and your inbox, you will need to opt-in for further emails. You can do that by clicking the button below and I sincerely hope you do. As I stated above, this work will require the commitment of many and we welcome you to join us in our efforts.
Subscribe to this content series

As always, please check out our website at DTinit.org or contact me, personally, at mchris@DTinit.org to learn more.

Chris Riley<br/>
Executive Director<br/>
Data Transfer Initiative<br/>
